gaza's Hamas run Health Ministry says
471 people were killed in an explosion
at a hospital in the territory Hamas is
blaming an Israeli air strike and Israel
and the US President Joe Biden both say
a rocket misfired by Palestinian
militants was responsible for now there
has been no independent verification of
either
claim this is where the sick are
supposed to be
healed instead the alaki Arab Hospital
in Gaza City has become the latest
casualty in a conflict that's costing so
many lives hundreds died in this
attack we were just sitting here and
suddenly there was an
explosion the glass shattered on us many
people were
killed many of of those caught up in the
blast were Palestinians who'd been
seeking
Refuge this place was a safe haven for
women and children who fled Israeli
shelling near the
hospital they saw this place as a refuge
for them to feel safe and
secure there was no advanced warning
before targeting the
hospital there were more than 3,000
people here for whom place was a safe
heaven the terrorist group Hamas which
rules Gaza blamed Israel for the
attack anti-israel protests have been
held across the Palestinian territories
including in the city of Ral in the West
Bank no craters these are the but the
Israeli Army says it has proof the
attack was carried out by another
Palestinian militant group Islamic Jihad
and that Israel is being unfairly
blamed it was at the time that 6:59 p.m.
when there were reports of an explosion
at the alali AL mahani Hospital in Gaza
City according to our intelligence Hamas
checked the reports understood it was an
Islamic Jihad
rocket that had misfired and decided to
launch a global media campaign
to hide what really
happened Garin meanwhile are left to
pick up the pieces from the night
before knowing this conflict is far from
Over Now The Carnage that we've seen at
that Gaza hospital has inflamed emotions
in many parts of the world protests
erupted across the Middle East and world
leaders are calling for
accountability
there's World Fury over the explosion at
the AL early Arab Hospital in
gazam protests are taking place in
Libya
Yemen and Iran among
[Music]
others our demands are addressed to Arab
leaders not to the West we don't want
half Solutions or half speeches like we
condemn we denounce we are asking them
to break off relations with a Zionist
enemy the Palestinian people did not
commit a crime they don't want anything
it's their
home islamist militant group Hamas
claims the hospital was hit by an
Israeli air strike Israel says it did
not carry out an attack on the hospital
it says a rocket was misfired by another
Palestinian group Islamic
Jihad as the blame game goes on leaders
around the world are condemning the
blast horrified by the hundreds of
people killed at alhi hospital this same
day in Gaza by a strike that I strongly
condemned earlier
today I call for an immediate
humanitarian
cire there is no excuse for hitting a
hospital full of
civilians all facts need to be
established and those responsible must
be held
accountable in this tragic hour we must
all redouble our efforts to protect
civilians from the fury of this
war many people around the world want
those civilians to be protected the
hospital blast is also spurring
demonstrations far from the Middle East
including in the United States in
Colombia and in the
Philippines security analyst Justin Crum
from the risk advisory company Cil line
joins me now from London Justin good to
see you again now conflicting claims
over the blast at the hospital in Gaza
City what do you make of the
situation the well as you say I mean
this this tragic situation uh there is a
certain amount of confusion as ever on
the battlefield and on this sort of
environment in terms of allocating blame
and in previous instances that happening
Gaz sometimes Tak years in in Far
quieter circumstances than now for
inators finally to work out what's
happened and of course there's no
investigators on the ground now looking
at this um the Israeli story though
certainly does have a lot of evidence a
lot of Merit um to back it up it's uh
there was definitely a rocket that was
misfired that was over the hospital at
the time um and the blast and everything
else every expert I've spoken to um
feels does support the sort of size of
rocket that was talked about from
Palestinian Islamic Jihad um but the
real point I think is an instant in this
tragic good course and the way in which
it's been viewed and seen that the
scenes we've seen after it in parts of
the Middle East the evident anger um in
many parts of the world I don't think
that's going to change whatever the
assessment subsequently is because it'll
be impossible to know fully yeah US
President Joe Biden made a high stakes
visit to Israel to show support but also
to deescalate do you think he succeeded
in doing
that the real blow I think for Biden's
visit was the fact that he couldn't
visit the the Palestinian leaders the
Arab leaders he was due to see in Jordan
um so we didn't see the full benefit of
the Diplomatic effort that was under
taken and it is amazing to see the
president of the United States flying
into an active war zone um to lead on
diplomacy and I think that was a very
bold move and very important and the
clear thrust has been we support Israel
but the very strong message that Israel
cannot forget the suffering of the
Palestinian people in this and it's no
good fighting a war against Hamas and
forgetting about the Palestinians
themselves and actually delivering to
Hamas what they sought to achieve which
is the victimization the people of Gaza
and an increase in Anger against Israel
so I think that message very strong the
effort towards humanitarian support very
clear we're waiting now to see does it
get followed through them on the ground
in Gaza and Biden called on the Israeli
government to not repeat the mistakes
the US made in the wake of 911 um you
hinted at it there what would be the
biggest mistake Israel could make is it
really the sustained civilian suffering
in the Gaza
Strip yeah this is what we call the
center of gravity for Israel's war
effort really and I think there was a a
failure to recognize this in exactly the
same way that after 911 we failed to
recognize what Al-Qaeda had sought to
achieve with the attack in the United
States which was to suck the us into an
unwinable conflict that created more
enemies than the us could deal with and
um this is obviously pretty much exactly
what Hamas have sought to achieve so the
the advice is very apposite and it comes
from a nation that's been there it's a
nation that has gone through this and
has recognized that you can't just
tackle a problem like this with military
force however vengeful you are and
however angry upset and justifiably
terrified your population is you need to
box clever you need to think more widely
and not do what your adversary wants you
to do and I think that is the very
strong message being delivered and
hopefully that that lands home
yeah Israel says it plans to destroy
Hamas given everything that you just
laid out is that an attainable
goal not just purely militarily I was a
very small Cog and a very large machine
in what was called the global war on
terror at the time and it was very clear
that a military solution alone will not
defeat terrorism you need a
comprehensive approach the the war is
one part of it but the other tools
around it the diplomacy the thinking the
humanitarian Aid the approach the
problem is what makes it something you
can ultimately manage um it's a bit like
a war on crime or anything else you're
never going to get rid of it you have to
actually control it manage it and win
support so it's inherently a war aim at
the moment just to destroy Hamas that's
a simple statement that's going to be
difficult to do I think we'll see an
evolution of how Israel approaches it um
and an evolution of that war aim which
may or may not affect how operations on
the ground are conducted I think
certainly affects how the Palestinians
are looked after and the degree of
international support that comes in for
the the poor population of Gaza that are
trapped in all this and I'd like to
bring in Shaya loow a spokesperson for
the Norwegian Refugee Council um sha
hundreds of people are believed to have
died in the explosion at the Ali
Hospital in Gaza City um what else can
you tell us about the casualties
there I don't have much more information
than what's already been reported I do
know that the people that were there
were people who were seeking shelter
there's no safe place in Gaza people
often go to medical centers hospitals uh
un facilities thinking that that will be
a safe place uh so many of the people
there that were killed were just
ordinary civilians trying to find a safe
place to stay with their families to be
protected from the onslaught because
we've seen that despite um Israel
telling people that they needed to leave
from the north ostensibly that the South
would be safer we're seeing that the
Central and South of Gaza as well are
not safe so that's why people are going
to hospitals and un facilities thinking
that that will provide them with some
degree of protection now sha you and I
have spoken before can you give me an
update now on on what you're hearing
from your organization staff in Gaza at
this
point so I'm in contact with my staff as
regularly as I can be over the last few
days connectivity has been an issue
there's limited uh regular mobile celles
service
there's limited internet so really we're
trying to check in as much as we can
through SMS um through WhatsApp when
it's available but it's really really
challenging to get updates from the
ground what I am hearing from Han Yunis
where where one of my colleagues is is
that it's just chaos and panic I can see
on the screen that you're showing people
struggling to get bread I've heard about
these uh long bread lines people are
fighting over just small amounts of food
there's limited water it's not pable
we're also hearing about uh shortages in
medicine Doctors Without Borders
reported that they have surgeons
operating on people without painkillers
or anesthetics because there just aren't
supplies the situation in Gaza is
getting more and more dire our
colleagues are losing
hope they feel like they can't go on
much longer that's what they're telling
me that it's just too difficult and they
don't all they want is a ceas fire all
they want is even if it's just 24 hours
for them to uh collect their things bury
the dead find food find resources get
Aid in the situation really is quite
desperate and for medical workers
there's even another challenge um we've
been hearing urgent calls earlier this
week that hospitals are running out of
fuel to run emergency generators um are
we already starting to see that happen
at this
point I'm I can't speak to the specifics
of what type of fuel hospitals have I do
know that they've been warning all week
that supplies are quickly dwindling it's
not surprising to hear that um
considering that no Aid has been a or
anything has been able to come into Gaza
since October 7th the Gaza Strip is a
place that has um that has very
few uh supply supplies and stock they
are dependent on on uh on things coming
in through Crossings on a weekly basis
there isn't that much stockpiled in
terms of fuel or other things to uh to
supply generators and other things that
are needed when when there's no
electricity and no water coming in we
have the news today that Israel has said
that humanitarian Aid um can be made
available in a humanitarian Zone in
southern Gaza uh does that does that
give you hope that there will be a clear
road map to achieving
that
what we need is not only for there to be
safe zones but we need assurances that
for people that can't access those safe
zones or choose not to go to those safe
zones that there's sa safety for
humanitarians to access all throughout
Gaza to be able to distribute Aid and
Reach people who are in need people also
are going to be able to need to go to
distribution centers to access Aid and
so what we really need are assurances
that there will be safety for all uh for
for all people seeking Aid and it can't
just be restricted only to these safe
zones we need humanitarian pauses in
which Aid can be uh collected and
distributed accordingly shanea loow from
the Norwegian Refugee Council thank you
as always for taking the time to speak
with us on
DW thank
you and I'm joined Now by military
analyst Mike Martin from Kings College
London hi um we know military's uh
Israel's military has denied hitting
that hospital in Gaza City is there a
way for researchers to find out whether
that is
true certainly uh if if you look at
social media at the moment there are a
number of videos of the strike and
photos Post strike and um what
researchers can look at is for instance
uh the angle that any uh objects fell
into the ground they can also look at uh
I can see it on your screen there the
blast radius of the impact and they can
look at things like trajectory and burn
marks and with all of this material it
is actually possible to determine
whether it is you a misfired rocket as
the Israelis say whether it is a missile
strike or even an air dropped munition
and and that will take some time and
people won't want to immediately come
out with the answer they want to be
quite sure but it is possible to
determine uh what type of strike it was
now several Arab countries uh have
already come up with an answer and
blamed Israel do you think that they
would have uh done that without having
intelligence uh pointing in the
direction of
Israel uh war is very confusing and you
know you've heard of the phrase the fog
of War um nobody at the point that this
happened including the Israelis or the
Palestinians will have known exactly
what caused the missile strike you as
I've just laid out it takes some time uh
to determine post fact what has happened
so at the time that there was claim and
counter claim going on uh neither side
knew for sure what it was that had
occurred let's look at implications um
of this terrible attack um this
explosion how do you expect this to
affect the course of the conflict going
forward what will the repercussions
be well we've already seen a number of
repercussions that today with Arab
leaders pulling out of meetings with uh
President Biden but I think going
forward actually this has uh hugely
narrowed no matter who it is that ends
up being you know that it gets pinned on
this has hugely narrowed the scope I
think for Israel's uh future activities
I think a number indeed all of the Arab
countries are now calling for a stop to
the conflict and pressure will grow
amongst Israel's allies like the United
States and Europe as well for the
conflict to come to an end so I I
actually think that this ground Invasion
that the Israelis have been talking
about since uh that terrible Saturday I
think that is now there is a question
over whether that will go ahead in the
form uh that people think it will have
done thank you so much for your analysis
that is Mike Martin from Kings College
London